Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Cruz.
George R.R. Martin is one of a group of new writers born in the post-war baby boom who is becoming a powerful force in the field of science fiction.
We asked Martin his definition of science fiction.
Science fiction isn't about science. It's what about all literature. It's about people and moral issues and the way people relate to each other and good and bad and love and death and pain and sorrow and all of that stuff.
The only thing that's different about it is it uses a different set of symbols.
It tries to get us out of our here and now world just as traditional fantasy has done for centuries.
But instead of using fantasy type symbols, it uses symbols drawn from what essentially is the new religion of our modern age, science and technology.
The theme that pervades much of Martin's early work is the intrusion of cold hard reality into romance. Martin comments on this element.
The dreams that I grew up with, that other writers of my generation grew up with, Hard Wall Drop, John Barley, people like that have spoken about it in their own writings.
And then the reality unfolded. Our dreams came true, but they didn't. It wasn't the same dreams. It changed.
And in most cases, it changed for the worse.
There was a story of mine called Patrick Henry Jupiter in a Little Red Brick spaceship that's included in Songs of Stars and Shadows.
Probably not one of my most famous stories or one of my better stories.
But it's one in which this particular question is addressed in a very direct kind of manner because I use a protagonist who feels the same way.
The World Science Fiction Convention, when Apollo 11 landed on the moon, gave them a special award for best moon landing ever.
Which I think is completely untrue. In science fiction, there are lots of moon landings that are much more exciting than the one that Apollo 11 did.
In fact, that's the whole point that I support the space program. My dream of, I think, it's a route that mankind should go to.
And in some ways, it's very tragic what's happened to it. And what's happened to it is that NASA really messed it up.
They took the greatest adventure in human history and through a supreme superhuman effort, I managed to make it boring.
That's what's happened to the American space program and that's what I try to address in that particular story.
But the theme in other contexts runs through a lot of my work, particularly my early work.
The fact that we need dreams to sustain us. And that the dreams are often, I mean that's part of, with Morning Comes Missfall too, the dreams are better than the reality.
Truth and beauty. Beauty is truth, truth, beauty, that is all you know and all you need to know. But it's not true.
Some things are beautiful but not true. And some things are true but not beautiful.
I grew up in Bayonne, New Jersey. It's a little industrial city right outside of New York.
At the time it was one of the major oil refining centers in the world. It was true but it wasn't very beautiful.
And I read books that took place on Mars and the asteroid belt and planets of other stars.
And they were pretty beautiful in their way but they weren't true.
So things don't work out that conveniently and that's the whole reality romance thing that much of my work does concern itself with.
In an early Martin story, Slide Show, the space effort is maintained through contributions garnered at fundraisers.
But I wanted to express the fact that I did have reservations and humanitarian concerns and all that about earth.
But I still think the weight of that story is very much towards the space thing and how pitiful it has become where they have to go around and give slide shows to rich people and hope to get a little contribution to continue it.
But I do see us going that way.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Cruz and Bill Vernon.
Our show today continues the discussion with science fiction author George Martin.
While we were interviewing Martin, he expressed to us his idea that the American space program is in the doldrums because of a poor public relations effort by NASA.
According to Martin, if NASA were to play on people's dreams of exploring the unknown, rather than to harp on the mundane, tangible benefits, the space program would be much better off.
Part of the reason we're going that way is because the way NASA has sold it is totally inappropriate.
They're trying to make people, they have people who are poor, they have people who are suffering through social cutbacks, they have people who don't have enough to eat, whose children are ill-clothed, who are suffering from poverty and crime and stuff like that.
In other words, we have a hell of a lot of problems in their life.
And they're trying to say, well, we're cutting back social programs, but we don't want to cut back the space program, and you ought to support this decision because it gave you Teflon frying pans.
Now, if somebody doesn't have any chicken to cook up, the fact that their frying pan may have Teflon on it is not going to convince them.
And the fact that the space program produced Teflon frying pans is of little interest to them.
Ditto hand calculators, and all of the other benefits of space program is supposed to have brought us and didn't even brought us.
But these same people have television sets on which they watch sports.
You know, probably we're all very excited about the Super Bowl and the World Series.
Follow Adventure Series and all that.
And there's the potential support for the space program, not the practical, dull, accountant cell where they show them the balance sheets and say, well, here's all the Teflon, you know.
If you want to get public support by a space program, you have to get it by making it exciting, by making it an adventure.
And it is an adventure. It's a colossal adventure. It's enormously exciting. Why the hell am I addicted to it?
Why are all these people here? Why did our entire generation growing up reading Willie Lay and Vernarvon Braun and what was going to happen?
And the dinosaur projects and the flying wing and the space stations we were going to have.
It was marvelous, heady, wonderful stuff, and instead they're selling us Teflon.
I mean, it's just nonsense. It's the excitement of it that they should sell us.
The strange things that might be discovered, the adventures that are there to be had, the dream of it.
That's the real powering thing.
Not that they're going to be able to make better ball bearings in space because of weightlessness, but the dream of it, that's what they should push.
Music plays a major role in many of Martin's works, from stories such as the lonely songs of Larin Dore and For a Single Yesterday,
to the titles of two of his collections, A Song for Laya and Songs of Stars and Shadows.
A popular song, Brandy, even influenced the plot of the short story Fast Friends.
We asked Martin if he himself was a musician.
Well, none whatsoever. No background whatsoever.
I like songs, music, but I really have no aptitude for it.
When I was living in Chicago, I had a number of musician roommates for a while.
They would bring in other musician friends of theirs who would invariably, because the whole group were musically inclined in one way or another,
would say to me, what instrument do you play? And I would say, I played a typewriter.
That's about the closest I've gotten.
More on George Martin in our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Cruz.
Science fiction writer George Martin is the subject of our show today.
Martin spent almost a decade writing short stories before he published his first novel.
Here he comments on the importance of the short story to the beginning writer.
I think that's just the way you break into the field.
And that's one of the strengths of science fiction, is that it's one of the few branches of literature that still has a viable short story market.
Where young writers and beginning writers can learn the ropes, can get their initial publication.
Novels, on the other hand, are not the best way to begin, as Martin tells us.
Novels are large. Novels are formidable pieces of work.
You just don't knock them off in a week or so, and you really have to know what you're doing.
I wrote a lot of short stories in my early years.
Some of them are good, I like to think.
Some of them are maybe even excellent, and some of them are terrible.
And I learned a lot through the process of doing that, and also through the process of selling them.
If I had been writing novels, I mean, it would be very easy to wash out writing novels.
You spend a year and a half writing a book, and then no one wants to buy it.
It's terrible, where it falls apart at the end, part of it's good, part of it's bad.
That's a bad way to begin, I think.
I've always felt that it's much better, especially in a field like science fiction,
where you can publish your short stories for any kind of young writer to begin with short stories,
to learn his craft there, also to establish a name for himself by selling to the markets.
It's much sounder commercial strategy.
Martin believes that if one does not establish himself as a short story writer first,
it's more difficult to break into print.
You see in the modern, present commercial marketplace of literature,
you see a whole lot of books coming out first novels.
There's nothing that's more deadly than a first novel.
That was not always the case in science fiction.
Once upon a time, there was a large enough audience that bought every science fiction book that came out
that a writer publishing his first novel could be sure to certain minimum thing.
Science fiction's gotten too big for that now.
That's no longer the case.
So a lot of people, Joe Blow writes his first novel, sells it,
because it's pretty good to get a publish, it just dies, it's a dismal, dreary death,
because no one's ever heard of him.
So unless he has some gimmick and lets us some reason, nobody reads his novel, nobody gives him a chance.
The way I did it in hindsight is much the better way.
I built up a reputation over five or six years from my short stories.
And when I finally did write Dying of the Light, my first novel, it was not by Joe Blow.
It was the first novel by George R.R. Martin that trumpet's drum roll and the world was much more receptive to it
than had I thrown it out beforehand.
So I think any writer wanting to break into science fiction should begin with short stories
and should make a reputation with those and then make the transition to novels.
At the end of each story in Martin's collections is a date and a location.
We asked Martin why Ian's story is in this manner.
Instead of writing the end, you put where you were and what time story was written,
it helps put them in a chronological perspective for readers who are interested in kind of observing the writer's growth
because the order that they're published in is often not at all an appropriate indication
of the order that they were written in, publishing schedules being what they are.
Some stories are rushed into print, some are held for years, some stories you can't sell for years
and you finally find a place for them and they come out five years after you wrote them.
So to really get an idea of kind of evolution and change as a writer goes through,
those sorts of dates are important.
In our next show we'll discuss Martin's novel, Dying of the Light.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The next thing I'm doing next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Cruz and Bill Vernon.
In today's show we continue our discussion with Science Fiction writer George Martin.
Martin's first novel was the enthusiastically received, critically acclaimed, Dying of the Light.
The story behind the title of this novel is interesting.
I wrote the book as after the festival,
which was my title for it.
I sold the book to Pocket Books.
At the same time I sold a version to Analog for serialization in Analog Magazine,
and they wanted it cut considerably, so I cut it for them by 30,000 words,
which is a pretty substantial cut.
And when I did that, I said, well, I want this serial version published under a different title,
because I don't want people reading a serial and thinking they've read the book.
Not when there are 30,000 words difference.
The book is a lot better than the serial.
So I told the editor of Analog to call the serial version Mockman,
because my book was going to be called After the Festival, which I've written it under.
He didn't like the title Mockman, but he kind of agreed under protest.
Then my book publisher calls back and says that the higher-up Peter Mayer,
who was running the company at the time, big publishing hotshot,
not a science fiction editor, but the head of the whole Pocket Books empire,
then he didn't like After the Festival as a title, because it wasn't science-fictional enough.
They were willing to make it after the Star Festival, but that gave me goosebumps
and made me want to decapitate someone.
So I said, no, no.
But they threw out After the Festival.
So I had to come up with a new title.
I came up with about 12 of them, most of which were pretty limp, and I sent in a list
of these 12 kind of dreadig which one they would pick, because I didn't like any of them.
And then, like two days after I sent in a list, I thought of Dying in a Light,
and I liked that title a great deal.
I liked it almost as much as After the Festival.
It's real close.
Right now I wouldn't know which title I liked best.
They're both very appropriate for the book.
And the publisher liked Dying in a Light, and I sent it in two days after the list of 12 bad suggestions.
And the publisher said, oh, Dying in a Light, that's fine.
We'll call it that.
At that point, I called up the editor of Analog and said, well, I still want a different title,
but After the Festival is now free because publisher changed it.
So call the serial version after the festival.
So my original title was used on the serial version, and the Dying of the Light title from Thomas
was used on the book, the fuller version.
One of the themes Martin explores in Dying of the Light is that of the misunderstanding
that can develop between people from different cultures.
There's a very significant point of the whole book is the role of names,
which I call it in the book, the importance of names, really the importance of language and linguistics,
to what we are able to think, to what we are able to conceive.
The hero of Dying of the Light, the protagonist, gets in trouble throughout the book
because he insists on making false translations.
He'll see something and he'll say, well, these people are slaves, but they're not slaves.
There's a word for it in the book, an alien word, and it's different.
There are important differences from slavery, but he sees it only in his own terms.
He sees people and he has to define them as friends, let us say.
When the word is tame, it means something very different, similar in some ways, different in other ways.
And to really understand another culture, you have to be able to think in their language, in their terms,
and not make false translations to your own terms that simplify and distort simply by the act of translating.
More on George Martin in our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Cruz.
1980 was a successful year for Science Fiction author George Martin.
Martin received the Hugo Award for his short story, The Way of Cross and Dragon,
and both the Hugo and Nebula Awards for his novelette, Sand Kings.
Sand Kings is one of those timeless stories that is destined to be a classic.
In 1981, the novel Windhaven was published.
It was written by Martin in conjunction with Lisa Tuttle.
We learned that Windhaven as a novel was not the original intent of Martin and Tuttle.
The first writer would rewrite the portion the second writer had gone on,
so each of us essentially rewrote the other one's sections,
and we alternated doing the first drafts after having worked out the bullet outlines of the plot together in conference.
It took place through the mail.
We learned that Windhaven as a novel was not the original intent of Martin and Tuttle.
Rather, it started out as a shorter story.
Actually, it began as a much shorter story, a thing called My Brother's Wings that we completed in collaboration.
It showed it to Ben Boven. He said, it doesn't really end satisfactorily.
It needs to be much longer, and he was right.
We went back and we expanded it and we produced the storms at Windhaven.
But I think by the time we finished that, it was pretty clear to us that there needed to be more.
By the time we did One Wing, years later, we let years elapse in between the writing of the first and second parts,
we knew exactly what we were doing.
We had the structure of the entire book and the role that One Wing played,
both in relation to storms that came before and in relation to the fall that came after.
So by then, One Wing was written, both as an individual and to Ben as part of the book.
Much of the novel's action is centered on the characters flying about on wings mounted on and powered by their arms.
We asked Martin about the research he did to ensure that the mechanical aspects of flying are practical.
Well, I did some research on hang gliding.
I got some books on it and read, so I'd be able to give the story a diverse multitude of required.
We must have done fairly well in terms of accuracy because hang gliding magazines serialized storms of Windhaven after it came out.
Obviously, they would not have done it if it had been too full of egregious errors.
In fact, I noticed I picked up years after the original story came out in Hang Gliding Magazine.
I picked up another issue of Hang Gliding Magazine on the stands.
I discovered that all these people were selling Windhaven altimeters and, you know, the Windhaven brand regalosales
and they become like a brand's name or something like that, so I impressed someone out there.
Martin explained the plans he and Tuttle have for Windhaven.
My conception of it is as a real trilogy.
That is to say, neither one big book nor a series of unrelated books, but essentially we began two stories when we began Windhaven.
We began the story of Maris of Wester Amberley, which ended at the end of Windhaven,
and we also began a story about the social changes initiated by Maris.
And that social changes rippling through the culture, affecting all sorts of things.
That story is not conclusive. That story requires more volumes.
But hopefully there will only be two of them that we have originally conceived.
If that, if you look around ten years from now and you find that I'm working on the ninth Windhaven book with Lisa,
you know, I have sold out. And hopefully that will not happen.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.